[MUSIC]
Hello.
The subject of tonight's
program, August Wilson, has
won every Broadway prize there
is, including two Pulitzer
Prizes for plays such as Fences,
Ma Rainey's Black
Bottom, and Joe Turner's
Come and Gone.
August Wilson wasn't born
into a literary family.
He wasn't even born
August Wilson.
Freddie Kittel, his real name,
was born and grew up in a
black ghetto, the Hill District,
in Pittsburgh.
His father disappeared when he
was a baby, and his stepfather
had spent half his
life in prison.
Terry Knox's film shot in the
studios here in London and on
location in Pittsburgh shows how
August Wilson has used his
knowledge of the Hill District
to tell the story not only of
his own community, but of the
entire history of black people
in the United States throughout
this century.
The fact is that as I was
growing up in Pittsburgh, I
could do nothing but write.
You say couldn't find a job.
I wasn't allowed to--
so many avenues of participation
in the society
that were blocked to me as a
black male, and they're still
blocked, and were blocked
to everyone.
You see, but I could write.
And no one paid any
attention to the
fact that I was writing.
No one cared that
I was writing.
It was something that the
society permitted me to do.
Pittsburgh is one of
the richest cities
in the United States.
Many of the great millionaires
such as Carnegie and Mellon,
made their fortunes there.
But there's another side
to Pittsburgh.
Early in the century, many black
Americans, the sons and
daughters of newly released
slaves, began moving
northwards in a great migration,
fleeing from the
poverty and degradation
of the South.
They settled in cities like
Detroit and Chicago and
Pittsburgh.
[MUSIC]
My mother came from Spear,
North Carolina.
And she came from Spear, North
Carolina to Pittsburgh because
her mother was here.
My grandmother, whose name was
Zonia, which I used in my
play, Joe Turner's Come and
Gone, had walked from North
Carolina to Pittsburgh.
[MUSIC]
The African-Americans who came
to Pittsburgh settled in a
district called The Hill.
Now it's run down, torn apart
by drugs and urban
redevelopment.
But in its heyday, it was
as glamorous as Holly.
Of course, then there was a
lively, creative scene prior
to the '60s.
Part of the lower hill at one
time was called Little Haiti.
The center avenue and
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
were called the Crossroads
of the World.
The number of jazz musicians
who have come out of
Pittsburgh is absolutely
astonishing.
Stanley Clarke, Ahmad Jamal,
Earl Gardner, Dakota Staton.
Just the name of Georgie Benson,
Stanley Turrentine
just to name a very few of
the ones that I know.
[MUSIC]
There's still one place left
where the elegance of the old
Hill District.
The Crawford Grill has been one
of the great jazz venues
of America.
August Wilson has come here on
a return visit to Pittsburgh
to meet up with some of the
writers he grew up with on the
hill 30 years ago.
It was a group of artists who
came together around the
Halfway Art Gallery.
We had poetry readings with jazz
musicians, and there were
myself, Nick Vannoy, Rob Penny
and Charlie Williams. The
painters painted and
the poets poeted.
This is a poem I wrote
for my grandfather.
And since I never knew my
grandfather, and speaking in a
generational sense, this is
generational grandfather, so
it was your grandfather,
Rob's, he's all of our
grandfather.
His chest stripped open
to reveal a raven--
huge with sharp talons.
The song stuck in his throat.
And beneath the feathers,
beneath the shudder and rage,
the pages of a book closed and
the raven took flight.
Bynum Cutler.
Savage.
Mule trainer.
Singer.
Shaper of wood and iron.
Bynum Cutler who spread his feet
over the nine counties in
North Carolina.
Seed carried in the wind by the
wind in the sails of ships
and planted among the king
break, among Georgia Pine,
among bowls of cotton, planted
in the fertile fields of women
who snapped open like
fresh berries.
Like cities in full season
welcoming its architects and
ennobling them with
gifts of blood.
August was one of the young men
who used to frequent our
gallery there and listen
to poetry.
At that time he was a pretty
young man-- this is 1962 I'm
talking about.
And he would come into the
gallery and listen to such
poets as Charlie Williams,
Nicholas Vannoy, Gaston Neal,
Aamir Rasheed, poets who would
come and read on Sunday night
at our art gallery where we
had a little cultural.
Because at that time the '60s
were coming right out of the
beat generation and they
still had a lot of
coffee houses and stuff.
So we had like a coffee
house type
atmosphere where ports read.
And August was a young man who
come along with Rob Penny at
that time and they
would listen.
They weren't even allowed
to read at that time.
They would listen to
the big guys read.
What that did for us, it gave
us a place, an art gallery,
which became a gathering place
for all the artists, the
intellectuals of
the community.
Anyone who had anything to say
came to the Halfway Art
Gallery, and they discovered
a group of people who would
argue with you for sure, but
who would also support you.
And in this exchange of ideas
and this discovery of the
world that we all were
making at the time.
At the time I met him he was
actually going through the
process of changing
from Freddie
Kittel to August Wilson.
And August Wilson is
an identity he
selected for himself.
But here again, this is in terms
of the social movement.
We were all selecting new
identities for ourselves.
The world knows that Cassius
Clay selected Mohammad Ali.
The world knows that during this
time, black people were
changing their religion, they
were changing their names--
so-called slave identify.
1963.
In that time he's
writing poetry.
He saw himself as a poet, he
acted as though he was a poet,
and he wrote as though
he was a poet.
And in fact, I saw him
as a poet now.
I still do.
I think he's a very fine
poet, even today.
How do we stay alive?
Working.
We both worked--
small jobs, being a porter,
washing dishes.
Hi there.
OK.
How you doing?
I haven't seen you since
the other day.
How have you been?
Fabulous.
Good.
Listen, I was just surprised
to hear about that story
you're doing on August Wilson.
When I first met August Wilson,
I was really shocked.
He was cooking at a restaurant
out in Oakland as a barbecue
man, so I said why don't you
come by and see me some time?
I was busy in the kitchen one
day and I looked out here, and
lo and behold, here he was.
And I come out of the kitchen, I
says, did you come to see me
about a job?
He just nodded his head.
He really didn't answer.
I was going to put him to work
perhaps the same day.
What he did, he sat in that
third booth, right where these
gentlemen are sitting, and he
took out a notebook, he took
out a pencil and he
begin to write.
And I got upset.
When he began to write it
surprised me because he
started to write and he
looked like he wasn't
going to stop writing.
He wrote and he wrote
and he wrote.
And I come out of the
kitchen and I
stopped him from writing.
I say, hey buddy, I said, I
ain't got no job for you.
[MUSIC]
In the late 1960's, black
frustration at the lack of
progress of the Civil Rights
Movement led to outbreaks of
violence throughout the major
cities of the United States,
including Pittsburgh.
As an artist I felt that
I had to do something.
And the way that I best could
participate was Rod Penny and
myself started a theater
that we called The
Black Horizons theatre.
And we started this theater that
the particular purpose of
raising the consciousness of
the people and politicizing
the community, so that we could
all better understand
the situation that we found
ourselves in America, and how
this related to our historical
situation.
And what steps we might possibly
take to alleviate
that or to acquire some power.
The causes go to the heart of
our society, and that's how
President Johnson put it to his
recently formed commission
on Civil Disorder.
He has set them the fearful task
of resolving the bitter
legacy of race hatred.
There are many ways
of resistance.
I think for me, the guy who
puts a gun in his hand and
goes down and robs a bank, that
becomes for me a noble
and heroic act, you see, because
he's resisting what a
society has outlined for him.
He's resisting the idea
of being a victim.
August Wilson's most recent
play, Two Trains Running is
set in a diner in 1968.
The play looks at the pros and
cons of violent resistance to
white supremacy.
You can't even use the
words nigger and
gun in the same sentence.
You use the words gun and nigger
in the same sentence
and you are in trouble.
White man panicked, unless a
policeman shot the nigger with
his gun, then that'd
be all right.
Other than that he panicked.
He ain't had nothing but guns
for the last 500 years.
You got the atomic bomb
and everything.
You say the word nigger and gun
in the same sentence and
they'll try and arrest you.
Accuse you of sabotage,
disturbing the peace, inciting
a riot, plotting to overthrow
the government or anything
else they could think of.
You think I'm lying?
You go down there at the number
two police station and
you say, the niggers is tired
of this mistreatment, and
they're going to
get some guns.
And you see if they
don't arrest you.
In Two Trains Running, the
protagonist is a bank robber.
August Wilson's stepfather spent
23 years in the State
Penitentiary.
I, myself, would not go
out and rob a bank.
I do not sanction anyone going
out and robbing a bank.
The people who do that,
I recognize that as a
resistance.
There's a resistance, for
instance, in terms of learning
the language.
There's a resistance to speaking
what is known as
proper and correct English.
You see, because that's a very
and creative in their
linguistic--
linguistic agility is
very highly prized.
So when blacks do not speak
the language correctly, I
think that's a form
of resistance.
So it's not just taking or
putting a gun in your hand and
going out and robbing a bank,
although I recognize it as a
form of resistance,
it's the language.
It's a resistance in terms
of the language.
Yeah, where you want that before
Wendy's, I could tell,
you're real slow.
They got a job for you at
John Eagle, cashier.
You probably be slow
on that too.
My difficulty in terms of
writing plays was actually
very simple.
And I couldn't like dialogue
because I didn't respect the
way the blacks talked.
I didn't value the way
the blacks talked.
I thought in order to create art
out of it that you had to
change the way they talked.
And so when I wrote these plays,
and then I did attempt
to write plays, I really had
black characters talking like
Europeans, because I thought
this is what you had to do.
I remember asking Rob Penny one
time, how do you make your
characters talk?
And he said, you don't,
you listen to them.
I did not think at the time that
he'd given me any great
pearl of wisdom.
I thought he was trying
to be smart.
And it wasn't until many years
later, six or seven years
later, that I actually
began to listen.
But before I can listen and
before I could hear the
language of the people, I had
to learn to value it.
And that's something that I had
to discover within myself.
And once I discovered the value
and the poetry that was
inherent in the way that blacks
spoke, then I had no
problem with writing dialogue.
It was only after moving to
Minnesota to live with his new
wife that August Wilson found
out how to write dialogue with
a play based on the illegal mini
cabs or jitneys of the
Hill District.
Anyway, I visited Pittsburgh
with my wife and we drove, and
she had never encountered gypsy
cabs or jitney stations.
And on the way driving back
home, which is at 959 one mile
drive, I spent the whole entire
time explaining to her
what a jitney was.
These guys would get together
and they would rent an
abandoned store front.
Get a pay telephone in there and
they would pay $15 a month
dues to work out of there, and
disseminate the number into
the community.
And when you wanted
transportation you called one
of the many jitney stations.
[PHONE RINGING]
Service.
2024 Grove Place.
All right, grey car.
Your mother still alive?
No.
I gotta get me some
white flowers.
Yours?
I never believed in flowers,
man, you know.
I never did believe
in flowers.
Even when I was a kid
I didn't like them.
She would put them on me, I'd
go to church and I'd tear it
off right after church.
So when I got back home I was
very excited and it occurred
to me why don't I write a play
that is set in a jitney
station that explains this to
whoever doesn't know it, and
also you can see the idea that
the men have created these
jobs out of nothing, and they
are able to support their
families through that.
So I began to work on this
play called Jitney.
And this was the very first play
in which I listened to
the dialogue, as opposed to
trying to force it into the
mouths of the characters.
I simply let them talk.
I was very excited and very
surprised with the results of
what they was able
to come up with.
I discovered that I could
write dialogue.
And not only could I write
dialogue, but I would write a
lot of dialogue.
Once I got the characters
talking, it was difficult to
shut them up.
Yeah.
Who?
No, you got the wrong number.
Hey, Turnbull, what's
happening.
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
ceiling.
Boy, I don't know what this
world is coming to.
What's up, man?
You know McNeil, don't you?
Who?
McNeil, McNeil who live up on
Webster old lady McNeil?
Got them two boys who clean
up down at the courthouse.
McNeil.
No, I don't know
no McNeil, man.
You know I'm talking, it's
Scott McNeil-- used to be
Brownie's old lady.
Brownie was staying up there
helping to try to
raise them two boys.
One of them got an old
funny-shaped head.
[LAUGHING]
Hey, hey.
Now I know who you
talkin' about.
Well the boy come in here a
little while ago this morning.
The oldest one.
Can't be no more than 18, 19 at
the most. Asked me to take
him on a trip up to
the north side.
Then he say he want to stop up
here on the Whiteside Road.
So I carry him up there.
He get out and go into one
of these houses, come out
carrying a television.
A TV.
And the boy ain't said nothing
about no television now.
No.
Then he want to put it
in my back seat.
No, tell him.
I tell him, hell no.
You ain't messing
up my back seat.
No, man.
So I help him put
it in the trunk.
Then he had me carry him
down to the pawn shop
on the north side.
Pawn shop.
Now I know the boy done stole
a television, but I ain't
saying nothing.
I want my money.
Yeah.
Come on back, stopped down
their path to get some
tobacco, and the fella sitting
around happened to mention the
name of this woman who done
had her television stolen.
Don't you know that boy done
went and stole his
grandma-ma's television?
What?
The name is Bolger,
Miss Sarah Bolger.
Now this is old lady
McNeil's mama.
I used to carry her to church
all the time before she
got to old to go.
Lord, have mercy.
The boy done went and stole his
grandma-ma's television.
Well much of his plays reflect
the oral tradition coming from
Africa and the south
and the north.
Because August, he listened
to the people around him.
He's in the midst of Africans
and he listened to what
they're saying and how
they're saying it.
You know, how colorful the
language is, how meaningful
the language is.
Put afro-isms that are
inherited within that
dialogue, that conversation,
going on around him.
And he has like internalized
that.
This is very much
a part of him.
And listening to the blues
he could hear the
same kinds of things.
The oral tradition
has just been--
the blues is like oral
tradition with music.
[MUSIC]
It was 1965, and I lived across
the street from St.
Vincent de Paul store.
And music has always
been important.
At the time I couldn't afford
to buy new records.
And I discovered in St. Vincent
de Paul store these
old 78s that were $0.05
apiece, and I began to
indiscriminately purchase your
records, 10 at a time, $0.50,
I've got 20 songs here.
And I had an old Victrola that
played 78 records, and I would
take these records home
and listen to them.
I became very proficient in the
popular music of the '30s
and the '40s by everyone--
Peggy Lee, and anyone who was
singing, or the Hoagy
Carmichael, Cole Porter,
et cetera.
So I'm listening to Cole Porter,
Hoagy Carmichael tune,
"September Song" technically.
And then one day in my stack I
had the yellow label, type
written label by someone
named Bessie Smith.
[BESSIE SMITH SONG]
I was literally stunned
by what I was hearing.
It was so drastically different
from all this other
music that I had heard.
And I somehow knew intuitively
that this
person, this was mine.
[BESSIE SMITH SONG]
And I discovered that, you see,
if you listen, if you
don't know anything about
African people and you
listened to the blues, that you
would discover that their
grace, their logic, their
morality, their systems of
social organization, and all
these things that you would
need to know about a people if
you didn't know anything about
them you could discover
from the music.
So once I discovered that it's
all contained in there, I
think the blues is the best
literature that blacks have
created since we've been here,
and there's a lot of
philosophical ideas in there.
I call it our sacred book.
So what I attempted to do is
to mine that field, to mine
those cultural ideas and
attitudes and give them to my
characters in the play.
[MUSIC]
One of the things that's rarest
in the theater to me is
a really original writing voice
that sings, that is
theatrical in the best sense.
And when I first heard Wilson's
voice it was hearing
a stage reading the scripts in
hand of Ma Rainey's Black
Bottom, the O'Neil playwrights
conference in Connecticut I
don't even remember how
many years ago.
And it was a very unwieldy
play, it was
all over the place.
It was much longer and rougher
than the play that would
ultimately be professionally
produced.
But this voice just sang out
to me into the night.
It was an electrifying
experience hearing these
musicians in this room in
Chicago in the '20s talking
about their lives.
Come on, let's rehearse
this music.
You ain't gotta rehearse that.
Ain't nothing but old
junk band music.
Any one of them junk
bands will do.
Don't make me no difference--
long as we get paid.
Well that ain't what I'm
talking about, nigger.
I'm talking about art.
What's drawing got
to do with it?
Where you got this nigger
from, cousin?
You sound like one of them
Alabama niggers.
To criticize Ma Rainey's Black
Bottom for formlessness is
like criticizing the music
that its characters play,
jazz, for formlessness.
I'm sure that when jazz first
came on the scene,
conventional critics said, oh it
does obey the unities, it's
disorganized, it's all
over the place.
Well, Ma Rainey's Black Bottom
doesn't obey the unities
because it's written
like a jazz
session, like a jam session.
And so there are musicians
there, they each have their
riffs, their solos, in the case
of Ma Rainey herself, her
arias, only they're verbal
arias or verbal riffs.
And in the end they all do
come together and certain
soloists take over the piece,
particularly the trumpet
player who ends up being the
dramatic center of the play
and of the violin incident
that is the
culmination of the play.
Kind of I can look at
you all and see what
kind of band you is.
I could look at Toledo and see
what kind of band it is.
Toledo ain't said nothing
to you now.
Don't let your leader
get started.
You can't even spell music,
much less play it.
Wha'chu talkin' about?
I can spell music.
I got a dollar say I
can spell it. $50.
Where your dollar.
Come on, put your dollar up.
Talking about I can't
spell music?
All right.
I'm gonna show you.
Cutler, Slow Drag,
you hear this?
Uh-huh.
This nigger bettin' me a dollar
he can spell music.
I don't want no shit now.
Go ahead, spell it.
It's a bet then.
talkin' about I can't spell.
Go ahead then.
Music, spell it.
I can spell it, nigger!
M-U-S-I-K, there.
No, no, no.
Leave that money alone,
you ain't spelt it.
Wha'chu mean, I ain't
spelled it.
I said M-U-S-I-K.
That ain't how you spell it.
It's M-U-S-I-C.
C, nigger, not K--
C.
M-U-S-I-C.
Wha'you mean Cs,
who say it's C?
Cutler, Slow Drag,
tell this fool.
[MUSIC]
I have an image of a man, a
large man, holding a baby in
his arms in this incredibly
brilliant,
starry moonlit night.
And he's talkin' to somebody
saying, I'm standing out here
with my daughter in my arms. She
ain't nothing but a wee,
little bitty little thing.
She don't know nothin' about
growing this business.
She innocent and she
ain't got no mama.
And at the time that he said
that, I had no idea who he was
talking to.
That's sort of how I
got into that play.
But really I wrote the play
because I thought that my
generation of blacks didn't know
enough about our parents
because they shielded us from a
lot of things, a lot of what
their life experiences
had been.
And more importantly, a lot of
the reasons why they made the
choices that they made in their
lives, which has come to
affect our lives.
The reason why my mother Frances
left North Carolina to
come the Pittsburgh she
do not share with me.
I thought that if I knew these
things then I'd have a better
understanding of who I am in the
world because then I can
see how various choices that
she made relates to me.
[MUSIC]
Bright pleasure of the southland
on which prosperity
and want depends.
A bumper crop this year, and
now all depends on cotton
prices as it's cotton picking
in the field.
Now you know why it's way down
south in the land of cotton.
The economics of Dixie, also its
life most characteristic.
[WHISTLING]
For instance, in Fences, if Troy
has a value for work, if
he will not allow his son to
play football because he wants
him to keep his job
at the A&P.
And we found out that because
Try did not have a job, he
ended up in a penitentiary.
And suddenly we're able to
understand when he says you
get your butt down there to the
A&P and get your job back,
we're better able to
understand that.
Yo mama tell me you done gone
and got recruited by one of
them college football teams,
is that right?
Yeah.
Coach Zellman say the recruiter
gonna be comin' by
to talk to you and get you to
sign the permission papers.
I thought you was supposed
to be working
down that there A&P.
Ain't you supposed
to be working
down there after school?
Mr. Stawicki say he gonna hold
my job for me 'til after the
football season.
If they start next week
I can work weekends.
I thought we had a understanding
about that
football stuff.
You supposed to be keepin' up
with your chores, and holding
down that job at the A&P.
Ain't been around here all
day on a Saturday.
Ain't none of your chores done,
and now you're telling
me you done quit your job.
I'm going to be workin'
weekends.
You damn right you are.
And I ain't no needing nobody
comin' around here to talk to
me about signin' nothin'.
Hey pop, you can't do that.
Now he comin' all the way
from North Carolina.
I don't care where
he coming from.
The white man ain't gonna let
you get nowhere with that
football no way.
Now you go on and get your book
learnin' so you can work
your way up in that A&P or learn
how to fix cars or build
houses or something.
Get you a trade, that way you
got somethin' can't nobody
take away from you.
You go on and put your hands
to some good use besides
haulin' other people's
garbage.
Yes sir.
Fences is the most conventional
Wilson play, and
I must say, to me, the
least interesting,
although I liked it.
In white American terms it's the
most conventional because
it deals with a father-son
conflict about values.
Now in the case of Fences, the
values have to do with a
father's black American
experience and a son's new
ideas about that
same experience
which challenges father's.
But still, the overall framework
of that debate
resembles that between fathers
and sons-- you know, Betts
plays and Miller plays, even in
a Williams play like Cat on
a Hot Tin Roof.
In an O'Neill play like Long
Day's Journey Into Night.
I think one thing that makes
Fences somewhat more
interesting than that formula
is that in it, and in its
subsidiary characters, Wilson
gives a very interesting
documentary portrait of what
urban black American life was
like in that quiet just before
the storm, just before race
relations would heat up and
the modern Civil Rights
Movement, as we know
it was born.
And it's fascinating to me that
he freezes the play in
time there before everything
really starts exploding.
[MUSIC]
Seventh game of the World
Series, third inning.
Bob Hazel on first, Johnny
Logan facing Don Larsen.
The big throw is high and
Logan beats the relay to
first. The Braves are on the
war path, and big slugger
Eddie Mathews is up.
In 1957, professional baseball
was suffering from an
unofficial [UNINTELLIGIBLE].
Troy Maxson, the hero of Fences,
had been forced out of
the game, and spent his life
as a garbage collector.
Why don't you let the boy go
ahead and play football, Troy?
Ain't no harm in that.
He's just trying to be like
you with the sport.
I don't want him
to be like me.
I want him to move as far away
from my life as I can get.
You da only decent thing that
ever happened to me.
I wish him that.
But I don't wish him a thing
else from my life.
I decided 17 years ago, that boy
wasn't gonna get involved
in no sports.
Not after what they do
to me in the sports.
Troy, why don't you admit you
were too old to play in the
major leagues.
For once, why don't
you admit that?
What do you mean too old?
Don't come tellin'
me I was too old.
I just wasn't the right color.
Hell, I'm 53 years old and
I can do better than that
Selkirk's 269 right now.
Times have changed from when
you were young, Troy.
People change.
The world is changing around you
and you can't even see it.
I do the best I can.
I go out, make my way, find
the strength to carry me
through to the next Friday.
That's all I got, Rose.
That's all I got to give.
I've known men like that.
I think probably the closest
to a man like that would be
Charlie Burly for me who was a
prize fighter in the '40s.
They called him the uncrowned
champion.
In Berkshire was 100 best
boxers of all time.
That was a lot of boxers.
We were talkin' about that, and
he lived directly across
the street from me.
And since I grew up without a
father, he was really a very
strong male image for
me in my life.
And the fact that he went and
knocked people out only added
to the intrigue and mystique
of the male being conquer.
They still talk about 'cha
out in Minnesota.
Minnesota, yeah.
Yeah, when you was out there.
They tell me he was out there
knocking out heavy weight.
The only thing I'm so
sorry they just
wouldn't give me a chance.
I mean at the title.
Yeah, but from what I know
you're not bitter about that.
No, I'm not.
It's the way it was supposed
to be, I imagine.
When you quit the fightin' you
started working for the city.
Yeah.
33 years straining.
Well it changed a little bit
afterward, like they gettin'
in off the street now.
But we had to go back
and get it.
You had to go back
in the houses.
And a strain to bring
it out on your back.
And it was rough then.
I fooled them, Rose.
I bunted.
When I found you and Cory and a
halfway decent job, I would
say, couldn't nothing
touch me.
I wasn't gonna get
that last strike.
I wasn't goin' back to
the penitentiary.
I wasn't gonna lay in the street
with a bottle of wine.
I was safe.
I had me a family, a job.
I wasn't gonna strike
out no more.
I was on first base waiting for
one of them boys to knock
me in to get me home.
You should have stayed
in my bed, Troy.
Then when I saw that gal, she
firmed up my backbone, and I
got to thinkin', if I tried
maybe I could steal second.
You understand what
I'm saying?
After 18 years I wanted
to steal second.
You should have held me tight.
You should have grabbed
me and held on.
I stood on first base for 18
years and I thought, well, God
dammit, go on for it.
We're not talkin'
about baseball.
We're talkin' about you goin'
off to lay in bed with another
woman, and then bring
it home to me.
That's what we're
talkin' about.
We ain't talkin' about
no baseball.
Rose, you're not listenin'
to me.
I'm trying the best I can
to explain it to you.
It ain't easy for me to admit
I've been standing in the same
place for 18 years.
I've been standing with ya.
I've been right there
with you, Troy.
I have a life too.
I gave 18 years of my
life to stand in the
same spot with you.
Even if the language can be
specifically African and some
of the issues are, or many of
the issues are very specific
to black American experience,
first of all, one thing he
shows is that what's part of
black American experience is
part of white American
experience.
We're all in it together.
His plays have a great
interconnectedness to the
larger history of the
United States.
At the same time they have
such universal themes as
family, and parents and
children, husbands and wives.
And broader values that
relate to all people.
I owed you everything I had.
Every part of me I could
find to give you.
And upstairs in that room with
the darkness falling in on me,
I gave everything I had to try
and erase the doubt that you
wasn't the finest man
in the world.
And wherever you was goin' I
wanted to be there with you
'cause you was my husband.
'Cause that's the only
way I was gonna
survive as your wife.
You always talk about what
you give and what you
don't have to give.
But you take too.
You take and you don't even
know nobody's giving.
But I think Fences for August,
I think he wrote that in one
respect to prove something to
those who said that he didn't
know how to write to play.
And that was referring to the
kind of more accepted,
traditional, white way of
writing a play with a single
protagonist. Whereas for
August's experience has always
been a more collective
experience or group
experience.
And that's reflected in plays
like The Piano Lesson and Two
Trains Running and Joe Turner.
Joe Turner's Come and
Gone is set in the
Hill District in 1911.
A mysterious stranger, Harold
Loomis arrives with his
daughter at a boarding house.
The play explores not only his
personal history, but the
history of his entire race.
I listen to music because I
write, and I happened by
chance to be listening to W.C.
Handy singing a song called "Joe
Turner's Come and Gone."
Joe Turner was the brother of
Pete Turner who was the
governor of the State
of Tennessee.
And he had a chain with 40 links
to it, and he would go
out and lure men, swoop down on
them and haul them off to
his plantation to work.
Then I realized that I could use
that as a metaphor for the
200-some years of slavery.
[SINGING]
--Turner's come and gone.
Will you come on and play
if you gonna play?
I'm gonna play as soon as
I figure out what to do.
You can't figure out
if you want to sing
or you want to play.
That's a song the women sing
down around Memphis.
Women down there made
up that song.
I picked it up down there
about 15 years ago.
Evenin', Mr. Loomis.
But then what happens with the
play is you get caught up in
all sorts of individual stories
of people coming and
going in this boarding house,
which is sort of a weigh
station for southern blacks who
have come north looking
for work as America's
industrialized.
And percolating underneath that
is a relationship between
the mysterious stranger and a
man at the boarding house that
ends up taking over the play
and his relationship that
leads the stranger to discover
his African roots.
[MUSIC]
South Africans when they came
to America had their
own ideas of God.
Their own ideas of religion,
and et cetera.
And all these things were
taken away from them and
replaced with the image of a
white man, which is the same
image that has enslaved
and oppressed you.
Why did God made you?
God made me to serve my master
and bring in the crop, and to
make a good cotton crop.
This is what the
early Christian
church taught blacks.
So I think in that sense that
they have not given them the
tools for liberation.
And that since they
have failed.
Good evening.
Praise the Lord.
[APPLAUSE]
You got to do it
as a good man.
Thou will shout!
The people in the boarding
house are celebrating the
power of the Holy Ghost. Harold
Loomis challenges them,
and falling into a trance,
offers them a new spiritual
vision, summoning up the
spirits of African who
perished in the slave trade.
Stop it.
You'all sitting up there saying
about the Holy Ghost.
What's so holy about the Holy
Ghost. You're singin' and
you're singin'.
You think the Holy Ghost
is coming up.
You're singin' for the
Holy Ghost to come?
Well what he gonna do?
He gonna come with tongue,
with fire to
burn your wooly head.
He gonna pound to the Holy Ghost
and get burnt, wha'chu
gonna do then?
Why God gotta be so big?
Huh?
Why you gotta be
bigger than me?
How much bigger is that?
Loomis has a new dispensation.
You see, Loomis is saying hey,
you guys have got it wrong.
He said because I have just
witnessed something.
I have just seen something.
And what I have seen is I have
seen bones rise up out of the
water and walk across the water
and then be washed up on
the land and take one flesh and
walk down the road, and
they are around here now.
And they are men just
like you and me.
They are black like
you and me.
They came out of the
ocean and they are
walking around here now.
These are, to my mind, all the
Africans who were lost during
the middle passage, and whose
bones to this day, actual
bones wrestle on the floor
of the Atlantic Ocean.
Tell me about them bones,
Harold Loomis.
Tell me what you see.
I come to this place, there's
water that's bigger than the
whole world, and I looked down
and I seen these bones risin'
up out of the water.
Rise up and begin to
walk on top of it.
With nothin' but bones
and they're walkin'
on top of the water.
Walk without a stinkin' doubt.
Walkin' on top of the water.
Just marchin' in line.
A whole heap of 'em.
They come up out of the water
and started marchin'.
With nothin' but bones
and they walkin'
on top of the water.
One after another.
They just come up out of the
water and started to walk.
Walkin' on the water without
sinkin' down.
They just walkin' and walkin'.
Then what happened,
Harold Loomis?
The exchange I guess is one way
to put in between Bynum
and Loomis.
It can be looked at
several ways.
One for me is the baptism and
there's a naming of them.
I can't recall how many times,
and it's very purposeful, that
Bynum says Harold Loomis, and
that he is, in effect, naming
him and baptizing him and
calling him forth and asking
him to stand up as one
of these bones people
and to stand up.
And the way that they accomplish
that, in the sense
of Bynum is seeing the same
vision, so that each part is
telling the story and it becomes
a call and response in
which I get a call, you
give a response.
And your response maybe leads me
to my call, and my call is
part of your responses.
So that the whole thing becomes
part of the same thing.
It's a very African
way of expression.
Wha'chu waitin' on,
Harold Loomis?
I'm waitin' on the breath
to get into my body.
The breath's comin' in
to ya, Harold Loomis.
Wha'chu bonna do now?
The wind is blowin' the
breath into my body.
I could feel it.
I'm startin' to breath again.
Wha'chu gonna do,
Harold Loomis?
I'm gonna stand up.
I got to stand up.
I can't lay here no more.
All the breath is comin' into my
body and I got to stand up.
Everybody standin'
at the same time.
The ground's startin'
to shake.
It's a great shake.
The world's bustin' in half into
the sky's gettin' opened.
My leg.
My leg won't stand up.
Everybody standin' and walkin'
towards the road.
Wha'chu gonna do
Harold Loomis?
My leg won't stand up.
They're shakin' hands and saying
goodbye to each other
and walkin' every which
way down the road.
I got to stand up.
They walkin' around here
now, Harold Loomis.
Men just like you and me walk
right out of the water.
Got to stand up.
They're walkin' Harold Loomis.
They walkin' 'round here now.
I got to stand up, get
on up that road.
Come on, Harold Loomis,
come on!
My leg won't stand up.
My leg won't stand up!
The African who arrives chained
and malnourished in
the hulls of a 350 ton
Portuguese vessel has not
disappeared, has not vanished
off the face of the earth.
That he is, in effect, still
continues to live within
myself, within every black
person in America.
There's at least one heartbeat
that is fueled by
the blood of Africa.
We found ourselves in the world
that did not recognize
our language or our customs,
did not recognize our Gods,
and ultimately, did not
recognize our humanity.
Once you understand that you
have an intrinsic sense of
self-worth, the way your ideas
and morality, your concepts of
justice and beauty, your eating
habits, your ideas of
pleasure and pain.
All of these things go into your
mythology, your history.
All of these things go into
making up of a culture, and I
think it's crucial
that we, as black
Americans, keep that alive.
Now what the society has told us
that if you are willing to
deny that, if you are willing
to deny the fact that you're
African, if you're willing to
give up your culture and adopt
the cultural values of the
dominant society, which is
European, then you
can participate
better in American society.
You can go to school and you'll
get decent jobs and
have decent housing,
et cetera.
But that's at a tremendous
cost. That's
at the loss of self.
And I think the vast majority
of the 35 million blacks in
America have rejected that
social contract.
They want another social
contract that will allow them
to participate in society as
African people with their
culture in tact.
[MUSIC]